Hi. I want to talk today about David Hume on causation. It's one of Hume's most distinctive
and most surprising philosophical theses. Because when he follows out his method, it
turns out all sorts of things have to be committed to the flames as he puts it dramatically.
All sorts of things turn out either to be meaningless or to have a meaning that is not
at all what we thought. We trace them back to origins in experience. And sometimes we
find there is no origin in experience. This is made up out of thin air. It's bad news.
It's utterly meaningless. There is no content. Other times we find out, well, it does have
a content, but it's not what we thought. And that's what's going to happen with causation.
He's not going to say causation is meaningless, but he is going to say actually what's going
on within is very different from what you might have thought. You thought you were describing
a relation in the world. You're not. You're doing something else. So let's take a look
at how this goes. Hume is considering causal inferences. Sometimes we go from cause to
effect. So we say, aha, here is lightning. So expect thunder. Sometimes we go from the
effect of the cause as when we hear thunder and think there must have been lightning.
Sometimes it's going to be, let's say in a medical context where we see a symptom and
we say, aha, that's evidence that the underlying cause is this illness. Or sometimes we find
out that somebody's tested positive for an illness and we say, aha, here's what you
can expect. Here are the various symptoms you might start to exhibit. Well, we make inferences
then on the basis of causation, sometimes from cause to effect, sometimes from effect
to cause, sometimes from just observing regularities in the world to thinking there is a causation.
What justifies those kinds of inferences? Inferences from a causal relation to an effect
or a cause, inferences to a causal relation from various bits of evidence. Well, Hume
says it's actually tricky to understand this. Why? Well, first of all, the inference doesn't
seem to be something that rests on anything a priori. Why? Because we can imagine it otherwise.
I can imagine that this symptom has a different cause from the disease I thought. I can imagine
that that loud boom was not actually caused by lightning, but was, let's say, a sonic
boom produced by an airplane. I can go in the other direction and think, well, aha, a bit
of lightning. I'm going to hear thunder and then I don't hear it. Or it could turn out
that, okay, people with this disease generally exhibit these symptoms, so expect this to
happen and it doesn't happen. I'm free of that symptom. Yay. Good thing for me. But
it turns out that in short, that doesn't always happen and there's no necessity that
I can, in any case, easily imagine it happening otherwise. It certainly is the case that having
something tossed up in the air generally leads to it coming down, but of course that
could vary, that could change. I can imagine it just continuing to go up or just lingering
in the air. And similarly, normally, my hitting a ball with a pull cue will cause it to move,
but I can easily imagine that I hit it and it doesn't move for some reason. So I can
imagine it otherwise. There's no necessity to this idea of causal relations, at least
not the kind of necessity that means I can't imagine it otherwise.
So Hume puts it this way, the inference we draw from cause to effect is not derived merely
from a survey of these particular objects and from such a penetration into their essences
may discover the dependence of one upon the other. There's no object that implies the
existence of any other if we consider these objects to themselves and never look beyond
the ideas we form of them. Such an inference would amount to knowledge. It would imply
the absolute contradiction and impossibility of conceiving anything different. But as all
distinct ideas are separable, it's evident there can be no impossibility of that kind.
In other words, our knowledge of causation can't be our priori. I can't just reflect
on the nature of billiard balls and say that, oh, striking them will cause them to move.
I can't just reflect on the nature of thunder and realize it's caused by lightning. These
are not things that are part of the concept. It's really about the world.
And so we can imagine all sorts of wild things, right? We can imagine that seeing a statue
of David Hume in Edinburgh immediately makes people fall in love. It's like a love potion.
Well, I can imagine that. In fact, there is no such causal relation. I can imagine whenever
two people fall in love, a statue of David Hume appears. Of course, that doesn't happen
either. But in short, we can imagine anything. That doesn't tell us anything about causal
relations and whether they do or don't exist.
So we quite reasonably infer any causal inference is really a posteriori. It's something that
can only be discovered on the basis of experience. And indeed, Hume says, look, yeah, of course,
it's by experience only we can infer the existence of one object from that of another,
or the existence or currents of one event on the basis of another. However, he says,
here's the problem. When we think it's derived from experience, we start looking for the
origin of that idea and experience, and we don't find it. He says, actually, it can't
be a posteriori because we don't experience the causal link. You might think we do. I
see the lightning and then I hear the thunder or I strike the ball with a pull cue and
it does move. But he says, don't be misled. What are you seeing there? Are you seeing
the connection between the lightning and the thunder? Are you seeing the connection between
the motion of the cue and the motion of the ball? You're not seeing the connection. You're
just seeing the motion of one and the motion of the other. Or in the case of lightning,
you're seeing the flash and then you're hearing the thunder a little while later, you hope.
And you're just seeing one thing and then another. You're not seeing any link between
them. So, Hume says, let's think about the cause of motion, like the cause of motion of
cogs in a machine or of a billiard ball. He says, motion in one body is regarded upon
impulses the cause of motion in another, like the cue stick and the ball. When we consider
these objects with the utmost attention, we find only that one object approaches the
other, that the motion of it precedes that of the other, but without any sensible interval,
it is vain to rack ourselves with further thought and reflection upon this subject.
We can go no farther in considering this particular instance. So what do we get? We think about
this kind of motion. The cue stick moves. We see it move first. The ball is stationary.
Then there's contact. Then the ball moves. How did that happen? Okay. We see now, contiguity.
It was contact. So the cue stick did touch the ball. We see a succession. We see motion
of cue stick followed by motion of ball. But we don't see what links them. We don't see
the connection. We see the one move, then the other move. It starts when there's contact.
But what happens at that point of contact? Can we look in there? Let's say we get a magnifying
glass and I say, okay, you hit the ball now. I'm still not going to see the connection.
I will see one motion followed by another motion. That's it. So Hume says, when we look
about us toward external objects and consider the operation of causes, we're never able
in a single instance to discover any power or necessary connection. Any quality that
binds the effect to the cause and renders the one an infallible consequence of the other,
we never find such a thing. We never observe the causal relation. We don't see the connection.
We just see one thing followed by another. Franco Malley once said, life is just one
damn thing after another. And that's basically Hume's position. Life is just one damn thing
after another. And so we just get this followed by that. We start talking about causes, but
we never observe anything that is the origin of our idea of causal relations. At least
we don't observe it in the world. It's not there in watching the billiard balls, in watching
the lightning and hearing the thunder. We never see it. What do we find? We find constant
conjunction. We only find that one does actually follow the other. The impulse of one billiard
ball is attended with motion in the second. This is the hole that appears to the outward
senses. I see the motion of the cue stick, the motion of the cue ball, the motion of
another ball. That's all I perceive. I don't see anything beyond that constant conjunction.
This moves, that moves. I don't see the link. So upon the hole, Hume says, there appears
not throughout all nature any one instance of connection, which is conceivable by us.
All events seem entirely loose and separate. One event follows another, but we can never
observe any tie between them. They seem conjoined, but never connected. The lightning, followed
by the thunder, keeps happening. But do we see the necessity? Do we see the connection?
No. This is a little joke based on this. Don't give me that constant conjunction. Doesn't
imply causal connection. It's yours. Well, anyway, there is a kind of infinite regress
argument lurking here. Hume says, when we infer effects from causes, we must establish the
existence of these causes, which we have only two ways of doing, either by an immediate
perception of our memory or senses, or by an inference from other causes. Which causes,
again, we've got to ascertain in the same manner, either by a present impression or
by an inference from their causes and so on, till we arrive at some object, which we see
or remember. It's impossible for us to carry on our inferences out in full item. The only
thing that can stop them is an impression of the memory or senses, beyond which there's
no room for doubt or inquiry. So we get a classic infinite regress argument here. We
infer some causes and effects in the world. Well, we can infer a causal relation only
from causal relations, unless we can actually find that connection in the world, which is
what we can't, he says. So we get a causal relation only from causal relations. But that
can't go on to infinity. Any inference to cause an effect must start with an impression,
a perception of something. Okay, causal relations can't just lead us around within that circle.
In the end, we can't go on to infinity. It's got to be from something outside that circle,
something that rests on an impression, an experience, a perception of something. But
now we don't find the connection in the world. We just find one thing followed by another.
So how is that going to work? The transition from an impression present to the memory or
senses, the uneven object, which we call causal effect, is founded on past experience and our
remembrance of their constant conjunction. We just have the constant conjunction, the contiguity,
the succession. That is to say, we have the conjunction of this motion, that motion, or that
flash, that boom. And that leads us to draw a causal conclusion. But now Hume says,
that's weird because I can't find the perception. I don't see us seeing the link. And so he says,
this whole inference, admittedly, we do that. We see the constant conjunction. We move to a
causal conclusion. But is that based on reason? Or is it based on something else? He says,
if reason determined, it perceived upon the principle that instances of which we've had no
experience must resemble those of which we've had experience, and that the course of nature
continues always uniformly the same. Well, we'd have to have rational grounds for that principle.
But where could we get that? Ah, he says, there's nowhere to get it. There can be no demonstrative
arguments to prove that those instances that we haven't experienced resemble those of which
we have had experience. We can imagine a change in the course of nature, which sufficiently proves
that such a change isn't absolutely impossible. To form a clear idea of anything is an undeniable
argument for its possibility. So I can conceive of a future that's radically different from the past.
And when I conceive of that, you might say it's the job of science fiction writers to do that.
Well, I'm imagining just the kind of change. So there can't be any rational,
demonstrative, deductive argument for the claim that the future will resemble the past.
Well, is there a probabilistic argument? Well, in general, the past has resembled what came
before it. So I guess it's okay to assume that our future is going to resemble our past. But wait,
what you're saying is there was a regularity in the past that the future would resemble the past?
Huh, I can't say the future is likely to resemble the past because it always has in the past. And
so it's going to in the future. That just looks like a circular argument. And so that won't work
either. It can't be a deductive argument. It can't be an inductive argument based on past experience.
We can't have any argument for it at all. So, Hume says, we've got to seek something outside reason.
Here's how we find it. He says, think about a single case. Okay, one case of that cause leading
to that effect. One flash of lightning leading to thunder. Do we infer cause and effect from that?
No. Right? The first time a child experiences a thunderstorm and sees a flash of lightning
and hears thunder, they don't immediately say, aha, lightning caused thunder. Nobody's going to
guess that from a single case. And so Hume says, we don't get this sort of conclusion at all from
one case. But we can get it from multiple cases. If we observe several instances where the same
things are always conjoined together, we conceive a connection between them and begin to draw an
inference from one to the other. It's that multiplicity of resembling instances that constitute
the very essence of power and connection. And it's the source where the idea of it arises.
That's where we get this. Something about the repetition of cases gives us this idea from
which we get the concepts of power, of connection, of causation. But he says, wait a minute.
I don't get it. Repetition can't give us any new idea, can it? I mean, it just is a perfectly
similar instances. We don't get the idea from one. We're not going to get it from a bunch of them.
And so that doesn't make any sense. All our ideas are copied from impressions. We get the same
impressions of the external world. It's just the same thing again and again.
No new impressions are happening. No new ideas are happening. So look,
it can't be found in one of these. It's not going to be found in multiple.
So what's the source? We might expect him at this point to conclude there is no source.
But that's not where he goes. He says something new does happen. The repetition does something.
But what does it do? It affects me. It forms a new impression, not a new impression of the world.
It's not that I suddenly see something in the lightning or the thunder or the motions of
the billiard balls that I didn't see before. It's instead that I get a feeling of expectation.
I see it enough times that I see the flash of lightning. I expect the thunder. I hit the ball.
I expect the ball to move. And I expect it to contact and hit other balls and make them move.
So I feel a determination of the mind to pass from one thing to another. That's all the changes.
My feeling, my feeling of expectation. From one instance, I can infer nothing causal at all.
From repeated instances, we infer the causal link, but nothing in the world changes.
What does our feeling of expectation? There is a new impression, but it's not a new impression of
anything going on in the world. It's a new impression in us. It is a purely internal impression.
So the origin of our idea of causation is this constant conjunction of events leading to a
feeling of expectation, an internal impression in us. And that gives us the ideas of causation
and necessity. But notice, the source is in us. It's not in the world. Necessity is the effect
of this observation and nothing but an internal impression of the mind. The necessity is something
that exists in the mind, not in objects. So the source of necessity of causation is not in the
world. Those ideas come from something in us. It exists in the mind, not in objects. We project
that regularity onto the world. The mind, he says, has a great propensity to spread itself on external
objects. And that's what we're doing when we talk about necessity or causation. We're projecting
that onto the world. We can't find sources for certain of these ideas in the world, but we do
find the source in experience. It's just not in the world. It's in us. The source is an internal
impression. And it's going to turn out that that's true of lots of ideas, not just causation and
necessity, but substance, matter, the self, identity, morality. The source of all of those is going to
be internal and we project them onto the world. So he says in the end, it is feeling. It is this
internal feeling that leads to belief in all of those things.